---
layout: post
title: "MBO Scheme"
subtitle: "A graph-based semi-supervised learning algorithm."
author: "Alexander Song"
background: '/media/posts/mbo_part1/network.jpg'
---
<!-- LaTeX macros -->
\\(
  \\newcommand{\\rwl}{L_{\\mathrm{rw}}}
  \\newcommand{\\ngl}{L_{\\mathrm{sym}}}
  \\newcommand{\\diag}{\\mathrm{diag}}
\\)

<style>
details {
  display: block;
  background: #f0f3f3
}
summary {
  font-family: 'Open Sans', 'Helvetica Neue', Helvetica, Arial, sans-serif;
  font-weight: bold;
}
</style>
The MBO scheme provides a remarkably simple technique for modeling mean curvature flow:


In this post, we will apply the same scheme of alternating diffusive and thresholding steps in the seemingly disparate context of semi-supervised learning. To do so, I must first explain what it means to "diffuse" a graph.

## Diffusion on a Graph

As I mentioned in a previous post, a simple model of diffusion is given by the diffusion equation

\\begin{equation} \\label{eq:diffusion_equation}
\\dfrac{\\partial \\rho}{\\partial t} = D \\Delta \\rho,
\\end{equation}

where the “diffusion constant” \\(D\\) determines the rate of diffusion. You can numerically solve this equation to model the diffusion of heat, as in the following video:

<div align="middle">
<video width="100%" controls>
      <source src="/media/posts/motion_by_mean_curvature/diffuse.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video></div>

In the context of physical diffusion, \\(\\Omega\\) denotes a subset of Euclidean space containing a diffusive material, the concentration \\(\\rho\\) belongs to the space of functions mapping \\(\\Omega \\times T\\) into \\(\\mathbb R\\), and the Laplacian \\(\\Delta\\) is an operator on this function space. Now suppose $G$ is a graph with vertex and edge sets $V$ and $E$. Suppose that the vertices of the graph contain varying concentrations of some material that diffuses to adjacent vertices (i.e., those connected by an edge) at a rate proportional to the similarity between the two vertices.

The story is the same in the context of graphs;

In this scenario, the "space" containing the diffusive material is just the vertex set \\(\\Omega = V\\). The concentration (a function from \\(V\\times T\\) to \\(\\mathbb R\\)) may be represented \\(\\boldsymbol\\rho(t)\\) is an \\(n\\)-dimensional row vector whose ith coordinate represents the concentration of the diffusive material at vertex \\(i\\) and time \\(t\\). Lastly, there exists a family of so-called _graph Laplacians_ for the graph \\(G\\) is a square \\(n \\times n\\) matrix (i.e., an operator on row vectors). For my current purposes, it suffices that the reader; the collapsible tabs below provide rigorous definitions for the various graph Laplacians and a motivating example.

<details>
  <summary>
    Definitions
  </summary>
  <p>Let \(G = (V,E)\) be a simple weighted graph of \(n\) vertices with weight function \(w\). Let the weight matrix \(W \in \mathbb R^{n\times n}\) be given by
  \[
  w_{ij} =
  \begin{cases}
  w(i,j) & \mbox{if \(i \sim j\),}\\
  0 & \mbox{otherwise,}
  \end{cases}
  \qquad 1 \leq i, j \leq n,
  \]
  where \(i\sim j\) if \(i\) and \(j\) are adjacent. Let the <em>degree</em> of the vertex \(i\) be given by
  \[
  d_{i} = \sum_{j\sim i} w(i,j) = \sum_{j} w_{ij}, \quad i=1,2,\ldots, n,
  \]
  and define a degree matrix \(D \in \mathbb R^{n\times n}\) by \(D := \diag(d_1,d_2,\ldots,d_n)\). We then define
  <ul>
    <li>the <em>unnormalized graph Laplacian</em>
      \[
      L := D - W.
      \]
    </li>
    <li>the <em>random walk Laplacian</em>
      \[
      \rwl := D^{-1}L = I - D^{-1}W,
      \]
    </li>
    <li>the <em>symmetric normalized Laplacian</em>
    \[
    \ngl := D^{-1/2}LD^{-1/2} = I - D^{-1/2}WD^{-1/2},
    \]
    </li>
  </ul>

  with the convention that \(D^{-1}_{ii} = 0\) if \(d_i = 0\) and \(D^{-1/2}_{ii} = 1 / \sqrt{d_i}\) if \(d_i \neq 0\) and 0 otherwise. The random walk Laplacian is a normalized version of \(L\) and is thus named since \(D^{-1}W\) is the Markov transition matrix corresponding to a random walk on \(G\). The symmetric normalized Laplacian and the random walk Laplacian are related via the similarity transformation
  \[
  \ngl = D^{1/2}\rwl D^{-1/2}.
  \]
  Since similar matrices share the same eigenvalues and have closely related eigenvectors, \(\ngl\) and \(\rwl\) are often used interchangeably.
  </p>
</details>

<details>
  <summary>
    Example: \(\rwl\) as a diffusive operator
  </summary>
  <p>Imagine that a diffusive material occupies the vertices of a simple weighted graph \(G = (V,E)\) with \(n\) vertices. We may suppose that the individual particles follow a so-called "lazy" random walk, in which half of the particles at any given vertex \(i\) at initial time \(t_0\) remain at that vertex at time \(t_1 = t_0 + 1\), while the remaining half diffuse to adjacent vertices. If \(\rho_j(t)\) denotes the percentage of the diffusing material at time \(t\) that is located at vertex \(j\), then the lazy random walk may be characterized by
  \begin{equation} \label{eq:lazy_random_walk}
  \rho_j(t_1) = \dfrac 12 \rho_j(t_0) + \dfrac 12 \sum_i \dfrac{w_{ij}}{d_i} \rho_i(t_0), \quad j = 1,2, \ldots,n.
  \end{equation}
  For time \(t\), let \(\boldsymbol{\rho}(t) \in \mathbb R^{1 \times n}\) be given by \(\boldsymbol{\rho}(t) = \begin{bmatrix} \rho_1(t) & \rho_2(t) & \ldots & \rho_n(t) \end{bmatrix}\). Then \\eqref{eq:lazy_random_walk} may be expressed as
  \[
  \boldsymbol\rho(t_1) = \dfrac 12 \boldsymbol \rho(t_0) + \dfrac 12 \boldsymbol\rho(t_0) D^{-1}W,
  \]
  which is equivalent to
  \begin{equation} \label{eq:diffusion_equation_lrw}
  \dfrac {\partial \boldsymbol\rho}{\partial t}(t_0) \approx \boldsymbol\rho(t_1) - \boldsymbol\rho(t_0) = -\dfrac 12 \boldsymbol\rho(t_0) (I - D^{-1}W) = -\dfrac 12 \boldsymbol\rho(t_0) \rwl.
  \end{equation}
  The random walk Laplacian is not in general symmetric, and thus the above analysis holds only when \(\boldsymbol\rho\) is a stochastic row vector, not a column vector. Nevertheless, comparison of \eqref{eq:diffusion_equation_lrw} with the continuous diffusion equation in \eqref{eq:diffusion_equation} shows that \(\rwl\) may be used to characterize diffusion on a weighted graph, as long as the diffusive process is governed by a lazy random walk.
  </p>
</details>



; curious readers should consult FIXME or have a gander at my senior thesis. If we set the diffusion constant \\(D = 1\\), the diffusion on our graph can be expressed by

\\begin{equation} \\label{eq:graph_diffusion_equation}
\\dfrac{\\partial\\boldsymbol\\rho}{\\partial t} = -\\boldsymbol\\rho L
\\end{equation}

(for historical reasons, the graph Laplacian \\(L\\) approximates the \\(\\Delta\\) operator up to a constant of -1, hence the negative sign in the above diffusion equation). Using implicit Euler method, we approximate \\eqref{eq:graph_diffusion_equation} by

\\[
\\dfrac{\\boldsymbol\\rho(t_1) - \\boldsymbol\\rho(t_0)}{h} = -\\boldsymbol\\rho(t_1) L.
\\]

By rearranging terms, we obtain the linear system

\\[
\\boldsymbol\\rho(t_1)(I + h L) = \\boldsymbol\\rho(t_0),
\\]

which we solve for \\(\\boldsymbol\\rho(t_1)\\).


Now let's illustrate graph diffusion with a concrete example.
